Step-by-Step Guide to Encrypt an Unencrypted RDS Database
1. Go to AWS Console and Search for RDS
Navigate to the RDS section in the AWS Management Console.
RDS Main Page

2. Create a New Database
Click on Create Database.
RDS Create Database

3. Select Database Creation Method
Under Choose a Database Creation Method, select Standard Create.
RDS Choose A Database Creation Method

4. Choose Engine Options
In the Engine Options section, choose MySQL as the database engine.
RDS Engine Options

5. Select Free Tier Template
In the Templates section, select Free Tier.
RDS Template Free Tier

6. Set Database Instance Identifier
In the Settings section, enter the DB Instance Identifier name.
RDS DB Identifier Name

7. Set Username and Password
In the Credentials section, enter your Username, Password, and Confirm Password.
RDS Credentials

8. Enable Public Access
In the Connectivity section, enable Public Access by selecting the Yes radio button.
RDS Public Access

9. Disable Encryption
Scroll down to the Additional Configuration section. In the Encryption field, uncheck the box to disable encryption.
RDS Disable Encryption

10. Create Database
Click on Create Database and wait a few minutes for the database to be successfully created.
RDS Create Success

11. Take a Snapshot of the Unencrypted Database
After the database is created, click on the Actions button, and select Take Snapshot.
RDS Take Snapshot

Enter a name for the snapshot.
RDS Snapshot Name

Click on Create Snapshot and wait for the snapshot to be created.
RDS Snapshot Getting Created

12. Copy Snapshot and Enable Encryption
Once the snapshot is created, refresh the page.
Select the snapshot, click on the Actions button, and choose Copy Snapshot.
RDS Copy Snapshot

In the New DB Snapshot Identifier field, enter a name for the snapshot and choose the Destination Region.
RDS Copied Snapshot DB Identifer and Destination Region

Scroll down to the Encryption field and check the box to Encrypt the Snapshot.
RDS Enable Encryption

Click on Copy Snapshot and wait for the snapshot to be copied and encrypted.
RDS Encrypted Snapshot Getting Created

13. Restore the Encrypted Snapshot
Once the encrypted snapshot is created, select it, click on the Actions button, and choose Restore Snapshot.
RDS Restore Encrypted Snapshot

In the Availability and Durability section, choose the Single DB Instance option.
RDS Encrypted Snapshot Availability and Durability

In the Settings section, enter a name for the DB Instance Identifier.
RDS Encrypted Snapshot Identifier Name

14. Enable Public Access for the Restored Snapshot
In the Connectivity section, select Public Access as Yes.
RDS Encrypted Snapshot Public Access

15. Restore DB Instance
Click on Restore DB Instance and wait for the database to be created from the snapshot.
RDS Encrypted Database Being Created
